A couple years ago, I realized that the time I actively read books was long gone.

[expandir com mais exemplos e o primeiro andar]
Growing up as a kid, the public library was a favorite passtime; it was fairly big, had almost all the books I intented to read and, to top it off, I had not much else to do all day long. The library had a few floors, the first guarding the "serious" literature, classics, non fiction, some techinal tomes. The second floor was the children and YA section, alongside some stuffed posted there to draw youngilins in hope they mistake the books contexts for the figures' excitement, and the upper floors were about some kind of art that I never payed any expensive attention. I used to divide my time between the first and second floors: in the first I could show off whatever complicated book I was reading at the moment (and sneak in to some magazines they had in a forgotten area near the back), and the second was where I exclusively read a collection of classics deemed important to juveniles by some big publisher. I don't remember the collection's name, nor the publisher. I am not exactly sure it was a collection, perhaps I just imagined it so because all the books had the same feel: a somewhat passé vocabulary, usualy adventure themed and probably written by an European during the 18 or 19 century. _Ivanhoe_, _Gulliver's Travels_, _Robinson Crusoe_, _The Last of the Mohicans_, _Treasure Island_... Don't get me wrong, the books were not necessarily bad (to be frank, by now I don't remember much of them) but, for some reason, I grew extremely tired of that thus called passé-18-European style. I couldn't read even books that were entirely different if they resemble at least in one way these others. In the lower floor, I remember hating The Red and the Black. I couldn't take any other Mark Twain book. I had a mania a la Bras Cubas', only in the negative sense: I will not read any other book that wasn't radically different (to my classification of the time). 

This, which may be suprinsing in the age of internet and its easyness of interest searching, slowed down my reading. I could not readly find a book I judged "different" enough to read. Be it because of the kind of books the library prized, because I had almost none to ask for recomendations, or I was just looking at the wrong places, the amount of books I read per year plummeted. However, if any truth to the adage about quality before quantity, I read some fantastic books in this period, which I still remember dearly [...] [como cada vez menos livros eram considerados bons] 

The trend continued until the time of the opening sentence  